# Researcher Degrees of Freedom in Methodological Simulation Studies: An Illustration from Medical Statistics

The design and analysis of a study involve many choices that are often
arbitrary. These choices can affect the results and conclusions, referred to
as researcher degrees of freedom. Recently, Pawel, Kook, and Reeve (2022)
have shown that even simulation studies are affected by these questionable
research practices.
Specifically, in medical research, a randomised controlled trial (RCT)
might draw false-positive conclusions due to questionable research prac-
tices, which can be damaging. Many statistical methods that would also
be used to analyse an RCT are primarily based on comparative simulation
studies. However, treatment would not be approved after only complet-
ing the preclinical stage, which can be compared to a simulation study
(Boulesteix, Wilson, & Hapfelmeier, 2017). Therefore, this thesis investi-
gates researcher degrees of freedom in a simulation study based on an RCT
for an ordinal outcome variable. The study consists of 600 combinations
containing choices in the sample size, the number of categories of the or-
dinal outcome and the probability distribution in the allocation variable.
Furthermore, the probability distributions are selected theoretically, but
more realistic probabilities were included from previous studies.
In conclusion, the investigated researcher degrees of freedom have been
shown to impact the conclusions drawn in specific scenarios. Specifically,
the sample size and the number of categories have proven essential choices
in the study design. However, these researcher degrees of freedom are them-
selves chosen arbitrarily. Therefore, further research on realistic probability
distributions might be beneficial.


## Deployment 

The execution of the `global.R` file provides the user with the results and figures of this project. The parameters of the data-generating mechanism can be adjusted here. The default number of iterations is set to 1, however, the project results contain 10000 iterations.

The computation time is extremely high.
Therefore, it is advised to at least read in the raw simulation results `sim_methods.RDS` before executing the `global.R` file.


## Repository structure

This repository is structured into a code file, a results file and a figures file.
The code file includes all scripts and functions necessary to execute this simulation study including the plotting of relevant figures. 
The simulation results are saved in the results file, whereas the plots are saved in the figures file.

`global.R`: This is the deployment file. By running this file the simulation study along with the figures is computed. Further, changes in the parameters, cores, and iterations can be made here. 

`computation_time.csv`: This .csv table contains some information on the elapsed time of the data-generating mechanisms that have been collected throughout this project.


### code

* `data_generation.R`: This .R file is responsible for generating the simulation data and calculating the performance measures on that data. Each combination will generate `n_sim` datasets and the corresponding performance measures. The execution of this file will take quite some time.

* `sim_aggregation.R`: This .R file aggregates the simulations generated by `data_generation.R` in one data.table object while calculating the rejection rate among others.

* `figures.R`: All figures and tables of this project can be plotted in this .R file.

#### functions

* `function_data_generation.R`: This function generates one data set according to the provided parameters, which are be the sample size, the number of categories, and the probability distribution in treatment and control group.

* `function_method_performance.R`: This function calculates the performance measure for ten methods of the data provided, which is generated by `function_data_generation.R`.

* `function_plot_rejection_rate.R`: This function provides a simplified version to plot figures for this project.

### results

* `sim_methods.RDS`: The simulated raw data generated by `data_generation.R` is saved in a list split into the parameters of the data-generating mechanism. 

### figures.zip 

The plots generated for this thesis can be found here. The subfolder contains the figures in the appendix.




